# DDS-Project-01

DDS-Project-01 Budweiser Data
 
Group Members:
Thad Schwebke
Rajesh Satluri
Kris Ghimire

Introduction
Using the Beer and Breweries data files provided by Budweiser, our group was able to uncover information that could be beneficial for Budweiser if they are considering entering the craft beer market in the United States.

The information we focused on was breweries by State, beer styles, container sizes, Alcohol by Volume (ABV), and International Bitterness Units (IBU).

The data provided for this analysis consists of 2410 US craft beers from 558 US breweries. The data analysis that follows highlights the following in order to describe the current craft beer market:

The purpose this project is to provide descriptive information about the current craft beer market in the United States.

The Data
Beers dataset contains a list of 2410 US craft beers and Breweries dataset contains 558 US breweries. The datasets descriptions are as follows. Beers.csv: Name: Name of the beer. Beer ID: Unique identifier of the beer. ABV: Alcohol by volume of the beer. IBU: International Bitterness Units of the beer. Brewery ID: Brewery id associated with the beer. Style: Style of the beer. Ounces: Ounces of beer.

Breweries.csv: Brew ID: Unique identifier of the brewery. Name: Name of the brewery. City: City where the brewery is located. State: State where the brewery is located.

Folder & File Information
analysis/ contains the reports generate when conducting the EDA.

report.html report generated by DataExplorer library. The report contains Basic Statistics, Data Structure, Missing Data Profile, Univariate Distribution plots, Correlation Analysis, and Principal Component Analysis.
report_files supporting files for the report.html report
data/ Containsthe data files used in this study.

Beers.csv list of 2,410 craft beers and their attributes.
Breweries.csv list of 558 breweries within the United States and their attributes.
docs/ contains all the background information important for understanding the purpose of the study. This folder contains two files.

CaseStudy01Sp2020_2.docs the case study document that outlines the questions to be answered by this study.
CaseStudy1 Rubric.docx requirements document that contains the requirements the study must contain upon submission.
final/ this folder contains the files required for the group project final submission.

DS6306 Group Project 1.pptx final presentation used to share the findings for this study.
Case Study 01.rmd the Rmarkdown with code and analysis for this study

Case Study 01.docx the Knit document version of the Case Study 01.rmd Rmarkdown file

Case Study 01.html the Knit HTML version of the Case Study 01.rmd Rmarkdown file

DDS6306-Group-Project-1.Rproj R project file for Case Study 01 project

README.md the repo file and folder definition, and the answer to the analysis questions

Analysis Questions TODO
How many breweries are present in each state?

Merge beer data with the breweries data. Print the first 6 observations and the last six observations to check the merged file.

Address the missing values in each column.

Compute the median alcohol content and international bitterness unit for each state. Plot a bar chart to compare.

Which state has the maximum alcoholic (ABV) beer? Which state has the most bitter (IBU) beer?

Comment on the summary statistics and distribution of the ABV variable.

Is there an apparent relationship between the bitterness of the beer and its alcoholic content? Draw a scatter plot. Make your best judgment of a relationship and EXPLAIN your answer.

Budweiser would also like to investigate the difference with respect to IBU and ABV between IPAs (India Pale Ales) and other types of Ale (any beer with “Ale” in its name other than IPA).
KNN classification is used to investigate this relationship. Provide statistical evidence one way or the other. Budweiser audience is comfortable with percentages … KNN is very easy to understand conceptually.

In addition, while you have decided to use KNN to investigate this relationship (KNN is required) you may also feel free to supplement your response to this question with any other methods or techniques used. Creativity and alternative solutions are always encouraged.

Knock their socks off! Find one other useful inference from the data that you feel Budweiser may be able to find value in. You must convince them why it is important and back up your conviction with appropriate statistical evidence.

Conclusions: 

The primary objective of our project is to take two different dataset, beer data set containing a list of 2410 US crafts beers and breweries dataset containing 558 breweries an perform analysis. We transformed the data in CVS format into data frame using R-programming, inspected and analyzed the structure of the data, merged the two data frames, and performed analysis on the merged final data set.

As Data Scientist, it is very rare that we get to work only on a single perfect data. A large percentage of work is to accept different datasets and merge them into one final data frame before processing as it is illustrated in our project. After analyzing the data, statistical inference is then made.

The objective of our project is to provide some valuable information such as summary of two dataset, relation between International Bitterness Unit (IBU) and Alcohol By Volume (ABV), number of breweries in each state and how can be an important to Budweiser, and to compute the median and max IBU and ABV. 

Based on our team’s analysis, we found that majority of breweries appears to be clustered towards the west of the Mississippi river with California and Colorado being the top two states. Why do these states mostly CO has the highest number of Breweries? Water is the secrete ingredients making CO the top state for breweries in the world and also making 2017 gold medal winner. The water alone contains about 80-90% of water chemistry needed to make the best beers. CO water has the perfect mix of magnesium, sodium, sulfates, bicarbonates and calcium which determines the hardness of water and ultimately its suitability for brewing great testing beers. Hence, we believe that Budweiser should consider thinking about CO in their next project. 

Other state of interest, New Hampshire which we believe has the high potential for growth has the highest beer consumers due to no beer sale tax but do not have much breweries. Utah on the other hand has the lowest beer consumer and only allows ABV <4 % which could be due to it being a Mormon state. We were surprised at Nevada, being the home of Las Vegas has only two breweries. North and South Dakota are lowest in the number of breweries but are one of the highest in beer consumption capita. 

Our computation of the median IBU and ABV for each state shows that median IBU appears to vary considerably between the states. However, West Virginia falls in the middle with median IBU 37 and Arkansas at the bottom with IBU 7.8.  On the other hand, median ABV per state appears somewhat consistent, with Nevada being in the middle with median ABV of 0.0669 which kind of make sense because people who visit Las Vegas majority of the time likes to get drunk, gamble and enjoy their time. Utah again, being the lowest beer consumer also has the lowest ABV of 0.051. In term of Max ABV, all the state appears to have only a small variance. Colorado has the max ABV of 0.128 and Delaware the lowest at 0.055. 

IBU which stands for International Bitterness Units, a measure of the bitterness in beer. There is a saying spicier the better, same applies to the beers as well. Bitter the beer better is the taste. The bitterness in beer terms mean better flavor which is produced by adding aroma hop flowers. According to CNBC news, the reason for rise in craft beer sales is its high IBU among the home brewing company that’s growing from garage to thriving commercial company. Our analysis shows that max IBU by states appears to vary between the state ranging from 138 to 0, with Oregon being the highest (138) and Arkansas the lowest (44.11). The reason we believe Oregon has the highest IBU is because Oregon is known for homemade craft beer and they also add high-grade marijuana in their craft beers. However, according to new law, started in Jan 2020, they are avoiding THC or CBD in their beers due to health concern. Arkansas stands at the bottom for IBU. 

In a nutshell, our analysis of relationship between ABV and IBU shows that there is somewhat positive linear relation. In general, as the ABV rises so does the bitterness. IPA type has the highest ABV compared to other type also higher the Ounces higher the ABV. 


